once around the
centur this is a story that goes back to
1979 when I was a young man studying
astronomy and a new object was
discovered in the outer solar system and
that was object cowl discovered by
Charles Cowell this little blob on the
right hand diagram there marked by the
two short straight lines indicating a
little faint moving object in the outer
part of the solar system and we knew it
was the outer solar system because it
was moving
slowly and the graphic on the left
represents a centur a mythical halfman
half horse beast from Greek mythology
there and uh there's a reason that that
was chosen to be the designation for
these objects this one and other ones
that were found afterwards so this one
object Carol became known as
2060 Kiren 2060 is an asteroid number
and uh soon recognized that it was a
small point of light moving around a
small solar system object too small to
be a planet um and seemed to be moving
in an orbit uh with no obvious sign of
it being a comet and therefore it was
classified as an
asteroid the discovery in 1979 led to a
search back through the records and a
number of observations were Unearthed
all the way back to 1895 when it had
first been noted so a very uh long
period of some 80 years or so between
the very first observation of it and it
being recognized for what it
is we think it's about 120 kilom along
its long axis it's slightly elliptical
so the other dimensions are probably
smaller although recently there was a
measurement by the Hubble Space
Telescope of double that at 218 kilm so
something a bit strange going on there
not quite sure
if that's correct or whether there was
another reason for
that so Kiren as I should call it orbits
the sun it's in an orbit in the mid to
outer part of the solar system the orbit
crosses and intersects with that of
Saturn and with that of Uranus um so
it's rather like a transfer orbit that
you would use for a spacecraft to fly
from one to the other and no I'm not
suggesting this is some sort of weird
interplanetary shuttle but uh it's
probably controlled by the gravity of
both those outer planets at the moment
um and so a little bit of an odd orbit
really many
objects are controlled by one primary
Planet so for example Pluto has a very
strong interaction with Neptune but this
one is controlled by an interaction with
two the second object was then found and
given the name folus and this too has
a orbit that is controlled by two
different planets in this case not
Saturn and Uranus like Kiron is on the
left but Saturn and Neptune on the right
and these orbits just can't remain
stable for very long eventually there's
going to be some sort of encounter that
is going to perturb the orbit and change
it rather radically and we'll see a bit
more about that in a
moment now this idea of them being half
man half horse is not just because
they're uh in conjunction with two
different giant planets but it's because
of the effect
that Kiron as it was
known seems to show a light curve that
suggests its rotating and then in
1988 it seemed to brighten up by about
three quarters and maybe even begin to
show a coma rather like a comet does the
coma is the bit of evaporated material
around the nucleus in a comet that then
goats Blown Away by the solar wind to
form the tail um and so prominent was
this that Kiren is now designated
95p P for periodic this is a cometry
designation and also 2060 an asteroid
number
so it's a dual designation um and that
fits the fact that we're not sure
whether it's a comet or an asteroid or
indeed a man or a
horse uh quite a big object to be found
in the outer solar system say 120 maybe
even 200 kilometers but there's a larger
one that has been found since Jericho
and this appears to clock in at 260 km
in diameter
and that's pretty much large enough to
start having a claim on being a dwarf
planet a full Planet by the
international astronomical unions
definition has to be a large object that
uh orbits the Sun that is dominant in
its orbit and has cleared away any
Rivals to its presence in that orbit so
it's uh cleared it away or at least the
far the minant gravitational object in
its region of the solar
system um and is large enough to have
pulled itself into a round shape large
objects have enough gravity which just
increases with the mass and eventually
overwhelms the strength of the rock or
material that they're made of and
crushes them into the most efficient
shape around spherical shape or almost
spherical especially stretched if
they're spinning of course but uh round
about this 250 kilometer Mark seems to
be about the dividing line where things
would possibly begin to crush themselves
from being odd potato shaped Rubble
piles into round objects and certainly
if uh cherlo was made of mostly ice then
it probably would be pulling itself
round at about this stage so it would be
circular in shape it orbits the sun
that's for sure uh but it's probably
fails the full Planet criteria through
not having cleared its orbit but two out
of three would qualify it as a dwarf
planet and this is its orbit in the red
there we've got Jupiter yellow is Saturn
and green Uranus and cherlo is in the
purple orbit tilted by comparison to the
plane of the solar system so diving
underneath it and Rising above it as it
rotates and roughly speaking
intersecting with Saturn's or on the
inside and Uranus is on the outside so a
classic double interaction there but if
you plot its orbit in a different way if
you run this again but you pin at Uranus
and keep Uranus still as the faint blue
mark that I hope you can see on this
diagram here and Jupiter and Saturn are
whizzing around in the red and yellow
inside and chlo is doing this very
peculiar Square shaped orbit relative to
um Uranus and this is showing this sort
of four: one ratio of uh orbital
resonance that's going on here we have a
number of objects that have these sorts
of orbits um in relation even to the
Earth um where they're kicked every time
because their orbital period just
happens to resonate with the one-year
period of the earth so that's what's
going on here um and it really means
that Uranus is probably controlling its
orbit to a large extent
another fascinating thing that was
discovered with chlo was it passed in
front of the star in
2013 and occulted it it blocked out the
pinpoint of light from the Star as the
main asteroid the centur passed in front
of it but as it did so on both the way
in and the way out of the occultation
the light flickered on and off a couple
of times and this was proof that cherlo
has rings we know that the four giant
planets Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune
all have ring systems Saturn is by far
the most obvious but the others do have
them um and in fact one of the moons of
um Saturn Ria also has rings we have
discovered in the same way by watching
it pass in front of a star and that was
the case with this little centur um and
by far the smallest body to have any
rings um chlo what 260 km in diameter
and they found that at about 400 kilm
from the center there are these two
rings one at 396 and one at 405 kilomet
uh these thin Rings going around it I
would add this is an artist's impression
we don't actually have a photograph of
it
yet so fascinating to see that and so
although cherico is the uh or at this
stage was the largest known asteroid and
uh sorry centur and Kiren the first it
turns out that one of the asteroids
hialgo has been reclassified to be a
member of the Cent family this was
discovered back in 1920 and was a real
Oddball asteroid now that's not
unreasonable because it does pass
through the asteroid belt it's actually
going interior to Jupiter in towards the
inner solar system and that's why we
were able to spot it so early because it
was uh highly illuminated by the Sun
moving relatively rapidly on this uh
pass of the inner solar system on its
long thin orbit but it does Orbit a long
way out and that is really suggestive of
being a slightly inner version of a
centur so uh it's been reclassed as one
only 52 kilm in diameter so fairly small
compared to the
others now I said that the orbits were
unpredictable and this is a projection
of the orbit of one of them
asbolus this is a Jupiter and Neptune
controlled orbit um so it goes in
towards Jupiter and out towards Neptune
passing by both Saturn and Uranus on the
way um and the encounters and
interactions with the giant planets can
be mapped with a computer here and
projected forwards and at the moment the
long axis of its elliptical orbit is
around 18 astronomical units so going
quite a long way out in the solar system
but in a few centuries time it projected
to wobble about and have an interaction
with both Jupiter and Saturn which will
shorten that down to
17 um and then it will wander about have
another kick from Jupiter and then a
further kick from Jupiter in about 27th
centuy time a long time I know but over
the very long haul these orbits are
fundament m al going to wander and be
controlled because in that case our
predictions then diverge depending on
just how close and which side of Jupiter
the object passes whether it's
accelerated or decelerated whether it's
drawn further into the solar system or
kicked out onto a much wider path and
the red and black projections diverge
quite wildly at that stage so it really
could go in all sorts of different
directions
now although chlo was the largest of the
named centur there's one more which is
worth noting that's 1995
sn55 we believe it's a bit bigger 290
kilometers and the detection date is
1995 hence the catalog number but we
lost it it was observed for about a
month and then the track was lost and
what happened is not entirely clear but
it's uh been covered now in 2020 two
amateur astronomers Dean and lie both
noticed that an object in the panstar
catalog that have been given the
designation 2014 OK
394 turned out to be the Lost centur um
and they tracked the orbit back and
realized that this object that pan Stars
had seen in 2014 married up with and was
this long lost
uh orbiting body it's got a very long
orbit at the moment the orbit is taking
it way off out um into the outter solar
system um out to 91 astronomical units
so that's a heck of a long way it's
three times further out than is the
orbit of
Neptune now these guys have these very
tilted orbits as well as indeed do
bodies like Pluto so here we've got chlo
folus Kiron aspis and so on marked with
typically 10 to 20 of tilt compared to
the solar system so fairly well CED most
of the major planets are much more
closely aligned than that I think Pluto
has a a 13 degree tilt in its region of
orbit Beyond
Neptune and they show some interesting
color effects these plot here is trying
to understand the color the long axis at
the bottom is blue blue minus uh visible
so blue minus green really it's the
difference in color between blue and
green and then we've got green versus
red in the other axis so the higher up
you are on the graph the redder you are
and the nearer to zero the grayer you
are so Kiron is fairly gray and then you
can see others that are marked on there
again we've got chow and folus right at
the top there with a very very red color
uh as red as m by comparison and these
red colors on these outer solar system
bodies seem to come from an organic
compound mixture called
tholins These are nitrogenous Organics
so they are carbon hydrogen and nitrogen
compounds maybe with a few oxygen atoms
thrown in for good measure and what you
see is that these outer solar system
bodies and this is a picture of the
surface of Pluto taken by new Horizons
have this amazing red coloration and
it's caused by a complete mixture of all
sorts of crazy Organics such as a bit of
the one that's shown on the molecular
diagram on the left and some samples
having been made in the lab by different
processes of cooking up organic
chemicals and uh then sifting through
the sludge that gets left over uh you
can find these amazing compounds being
formed now these are very important uh
they're very hard to identify because
spectroscopically you have a mixture of
all of these different uh uh somewhat
crazy molecules and the spectrum is all
mixed up so it's very difficult to
identify them normally we would get them
in the lab split them up with a gas
chromatograph put some through a mass
spectrometer some through a NMR nuclear
magnetic resonance machine um and some
through a infrared spectrometer and work
out what bonds they were and decipher
the mixture of the chemistry but uh when
they're all jumbled up it's really hard
to do that you don't know what piece
goes with what um and
so
fascinating particularly
because carbon nitrogen hydrogen and
oxygen is a recipe for life in a large
measure and the important uh chemicals
like amino acids and the nucleotide BAS
es a c g and U that make up DNA and RNA
are the exactly this sort of material so
these outer solar system bodies seem to
be covered in it and if you want to uh
hear more about that have a look at my
video about asteroid benu and the
recovery of material that came back from
the Osiris Rex mission to that brought
samples back to Earth a couple of years
ago and just in January 2025 the
analysis was published
and so space missions out to some of
these centur would be very interesting
there have been a couple of proposals
that have not not yet got off the ground
uh NASA Kiren Orbiter mission was to fly
a spacecraft out and put it in orbit
around Kiren um again an Orbiter is
great but you can do a certain amount of
work with that um but there is no
substitute for putting a a a Lander down
and doing chemistry on the surface
and the centur mission was to do a flyby
of Kiren and then visit another centur
now I think what's more likely is that
we will arrange to fly by A centur with
another mission going out to the outer
solar system perhaps uh the one of the
missions going to Saturn and Saturn's
moon Titan might manage to take a flyby
of a centur on the way we might learn a
bit more uh but what I think we ought to
be doing is rather than designing a
whole lot of unique space missions I
think we ought to take a leaf out of
Star Trek's book and design a sort of
class a planetary Pro probe and be able
to fly past these things and drop
standard probes onto them that will do
standard work take a leaf out of Henry
Ford's book and uh make them uh the same
so that they can survive in these
different environments do lots of
interesting chemistry and Analysis and
send us the results back and they'll be
much cheaper
to design the probes if they were all
the same than if we keep making
completely unique
ones anyway thank you very much for
listening that's a trip once around
these strange centur objects in the
outer solar system and I do like this
graphic with a half man half Force
flying through a cloud of uh asteroid
bodies one of which is emitting huge
Jets of material um so halfway to
becoming a comet thanks very much